[Music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today
we're going to start putting together that
geometrical understanding that we gained
last time about how pixels multiply with
other pixels to start thinking about the
algebra of maxel a bit more generally in
particular we're focusing on things called
identity maxel today which play the role of
little identity matrices inside the big world of
maxel so I remind you that a one maxle is a maxle
of the form e j which is just our short form for
the maxle which consists of the single Pixel i
j now diagonal one maxel are special kinds of
these they're of the form EI I so it's a maxle
of the form multi set consisting of the list I
I and these are particularly important uh they
have a certain item potent property which we can
see by looking at how they multiply so if we have
two of these say EI I and ejj then they're going
to multiply to eii if I equals J and otherwise
we're going to have zero this capital O is the
empty maxel or the zero Max Axel so this here is
at the level of maxel multiplication not pixel
multiplication these were pixels we would have
an emptiness here but these are actually maxel
because they're multisets consisting of pixels
in fact only one pixel but we get a another
maxle here not emptiness big difference so
if we look at this formula in the special case
when these two are the same then we see that eii
squ is eii this is the item potent property of
these particular kinds of very simple diagonal
one maxel and arithmetically this kind of
expression is very much like the familiar
law of arithmetic that 1^2 = 1 EI i^ 2 EI I a lot
like 1^2 = 1 suggesting to us that these eiis are
acting in some way like the number one in this
arithmetic this two-dimensional arithmetic of
maxel that we are setting out here so we are
going to see that in fact eii does act like the
identity number one but only in a rather specific
or special way so only if we multiply it by maxel
supported on its row on the right or supported on
its column on the left so for for example here is
e22 okay it has a single one in the 22 position
and everywhere else at zero if we multiply it on
the right by a maxle whose elements are entirely
supported on the same row as uh this maxle has its
pixel in other words the second row then we can
check that the product of this times this is this
itself remind you how you do the multiplication
so the top row 0 + 0 0 + 0 0 + 0 Etc and then the
second row 0 + 3 0 + 5 0 + 4 Etc so we are going
to be doing some Maxum multiplication here and
I'm going to leave it to you to check a lot of
the uh multiplication so bit of practice for you
so here's a situation in the other situation
where we have the um eii on the right hand side
in this case it's e33 we're multiplying it by
this particular maxel on the left and what we
get is a copy of the thing that we started with so
yes this thing here is acting as the identity on
this thing because this maxle has its support
on the same column as the diagonal one maxle
okay you can check that that actually uh works so
these diagonal one maxel do act like the identity
but only in a rather limited sense and it depends
whether we're multiplying on the right or on the
left more generally it's not hard to see that
multiplication by eii restricts a axle to either
the E row or the E column depending on whether
we're multiplying on the right or on the left so
as illustrated by these two examples here we have
e22 we're multiplying it by this somewhat General
maxle this thing here is on the right and what we
get is the Restriction of this maxle to the second
row the second row stays the same everything
else is replaced with zero that's the effect of
multiplying this thing on the right by m axle it
restricts to the row of the diagonal maxle similar
situation happens when we're multiplying on the
left here is the same diagonal maxel e22 here is
the same maxle multiplying on the left and now not
too hard to check what we're getting is just the
second colum and everything else is replaced with
zero so we're restricting the max maxel to just
its second column here we were restricting the
maxel to the second row and this is consistent
with what we observed in the previous slide if
the maxle here was supported entirely on this
second row then we would be getting itself back
again similarly if this maxle was only supported
on the second column then we would be getting it
back again when we multiply now let me pause for
a minute and introduce another kind of notion
that's going to be very important for us here
to discuss this Max algebra we need to have
the idea of a set of natural numbers which is
of course intrinsically an important idea anyway
that we need to Define and of course we're going
to Define it in a rather precise way so we're
going to introduce this newish type Set n meaning
a set of natural numbers so our definition is that
a set of natural numbers say capital J is here's
the definition it is a k set from n for some K in
natural numbers plus which means natural numbers
or possibly also zero and some n a natural number
so we've talked a lot about K sets from n and if
we allow arbitrary KS and arbitrary NS then we're
talking about an arbitrary set of natural numbers
J so for example these here are all sets of
natural numbers according to this definition
the set 1 three all right so that's a two set
from three that is a set of natural numbers here
is the set consisting of the single natural
number 578 so that's a one set from say 600
so it falls into this category here is our
empty set which is a zero set has no elements
say a zero set from five and here is set
1 2 3 7 12 that's a five set from say 12
so although we're not saying what the k and
the N are we require that there be a k and
that there be an N so if somebody asks us wait
a minute what's the K what's the N that we can
tell them say the K is five the N is 12 this
really is a k set from n for some K and some
n here are some examples of things which are not
sets of natural numbers this thing o comma 2 comma
3 this certainly looks traditionally like a set
of natural numbers but remember our convention
that sets do not have commas if we want commas in
there we're talking about some different kind of
data structure we're talking about an ordered
set or an O set right that's our convention so
this is not a set this is an O set as far as we're
concerned so this is not a set of natural numbers
how about this thing 54 with square brackets well
the square brackets means that we're not talking
about a set this is an M set different from a
set so that's not a set of natural numbers 3 1
3 Hales the set notation is okay but they're not
all natural numbers right because 3 over2 is not a
natural number so that's not a set how about this
have a look at this this is quite important the
set 2 + 4 and 7 cubed we are not going to allow
this as a set of natural numbers if would be easy
enough to evaluate these things 2 + 4 evaluates
to 6 and 7 cubed evaluates to whatever it does
okay but the fact that we have not evaluated
these numbers and not have not expressed them
in Hindu Arabic form means that this is not
officially a set of natural numbers because
remember when we were talking about K sets from
n we were rather fussy that we insisted that all
the elements be natural numbers expressed in Hindu
era Arabic form we were not allowing any kind of
arithmetical Expressions that evaluate to natural
numbers we were obliged to actually write down the
natural numbers themselves okay so we're going to
maintain that strictness that rigor of thinking
here this thing how about this the set 1 two 3
dot dot do1 well presumably the dot dot dot means
the other numbers which are in the obvious sort
of sequence namely four 5 6 7 8 9 but it's not
entirely clear is it and so we're not going
to allow this we're not going to allow this
kind of slight sloppiness in talking about sets
of natural numbers if you want to write down a
set of natural numbers if I want to write down
a set of natural numbers I'm obliged to write
each one of them down we're going to agree that
way there is no possible argument no possible
discussion is it or isn't it we can all then
agree yes that is a set of natural numbers yes
that is a set of natural numbers no that is
not a set of natural numbers we want there to
be agreement similarly 2 4 6 8 10 dot dot dot
well who knows what that dot dot dot means and
even if there is some phrase accompanying the dot
dot dot even if we accompany it with the phrase
and by the dots we mean the set of all even
numbers carrying on 12 14 16 and so on you
that's still just phraseology as far as we're
concerned the set has to be explicitly laid
out each of the elements has to be actually
written down no substitutes are allowed this is
definitely not a set of natural numbers because
it has not been written down in its entirety
all right so we're adopting a strictness here
that I know you're not used to if you're doing
ordinary mathematics ordinary modern mathematics
but it's going to be very very essential for us
as we keep going in this direction to maintain
this strong position this willingness to police
very precisely our definitions okay very very
important that we maintain this attitude so let
me elaborate a little bit on those remarks so
here's some more examples of things which are
certainly not sets of natural numbers even though
in traditional mathematics a lot of these would be
considered to be obviously sets of natural numbers
okay so for example the the phrase the set of all
prime numbers okay that's a common phrase many
mathematics students believe that that actually
has a legitimate meaning we're going to see that
that's a Highly Questionable uh assumption in any
case for us this is clearly not an example of a
set of natural numbers to have a set of natural
numbers we have to have braces we actually have
to have numbers and we have to have a case set
from n finite number listed out its entirety an
English phrase like this familiar though it may
be is not going to be allowed similarly this kind
of convention is not allowed we are not allowed
to write the set of n in natural numbers such that
and then some condition like 2 the n + 1 is prime
yes I know this is very common terminology and
know accepted kind of form but it's not accepted
for us okay we are not going to allow this
thing because let me explain why first of all
it's very hard in general to convert such a
rather open-ended kind of statement into the
kind of precise concrete explicit write downable
set that we are envisioning okay it's not at all
so easy to get hold of this set in particular when
n is very very large uh it's quite problematic to
decide whether we get numbered like this that
are Prime in fact finding primes of this form
is a challenge that gets increasingly hard
as n gets bake in particular we don't know
whether there are infinite numbers of primes of
this form so there's all kinds of complexity and
ambiguity Associated to this kind of thing but
in particular you're just not able to write it
down that's the litmus test ultimately can you
write it down and show it to us you can't so this
is not a set of natural numbers how about this
thing the set of M in natural numbers such that
M2 equal m now while this condition here is much
simpler than this condition we're talking about
natural numbers there's only in fact one natural
number that satisfies that namely m equal 1 so
we could argue that this is just another way
of describing the set consisting of the single
element one nevertheless we are not going to
allow this as a set of natural numbers this is
not a valid set of natural numbers if we want
the set consisting of one we have to write the
set with one okay we're not allowing ourselves all
kinds of alternate descriptive phrases to try to
invoke the objects themselves we want the objects
themselves this is uh maybe clear if we consider
this more outlandish example so here's a another
kind of phrase which is much more problematic and
everybody can see that it's problematic the set
of K in natural number such that The Lochness
Monster thinks K is lucky okay so we're assuming
there something called Lochness Monster we're
assuming that Lochness monsters think that they
have a notion of lucky that there's actually you
know this thing makes some kind of sense it's
obviously rather artificial so almost every
mathematician would look at this and say well
this is clearly not a proper definition this
phrase is clearly outlandish most mathematicians
would look at this and say well this is clearly
quite reasonable okay but the problem is that if
you're going to allow discussion of descriptions
of sets with phrases then you have to somehow
draw a line between this one which you might
want and this one which you definitely don't
want okay so there's some fence that has to be
built constructed between the ones you want and
the ones that you don't want so if you are going
to allow phrases like this to describe sets
you're obliged to come up with a very precise
description of the fence that separates the ones
that are good from the ones that are bad this is
enormously difficult to do nobody is capable
of doing this people just pretend that they
can do this okay but they can't and because of
that because of the the difficulty in actually
determining what kind of phrase is allowed and
what isn't we are going to avoid phrases like
this all together right just not allowed you
want a set of natural numbers you write them
all down for us and show them to us and finally
the set 1 2 3 dot dot dot the set of all natural
numbers the dot dot dot is not a sufficient
replacement for the vast humity of natural
numbers which are supposedly out there this
is definitely not a set of natural numbers for
us okay so to summarize a set of natural numbers
it's a new type J is a set of natural numbers
means that J is a set K set from n for some n
a natural number and K a natural number plus
and I remind you that all the elements need to be
explicitly written down in standard Hindu Arabic
form that's our convention and we have to have
braces and no commas signifying no repetitions and
ORD is unimportant these are our conventions for
sets of natural numbers great okay so now let's
Define partial identity maxel we're going to use
this idea of a set of natural numbers to create
a more General kind of identity element in our
world of axles so for J a set of natural numbers
we'll Define e subj to be the sum as Little
J runs through capital J of the one maxel e
JJ such a maxle will be called a partial identity
maxle so we may not always say partial may just
refer to it as an identity axle the sum here
refers to M set addition these are all M sets
they're maxel in particular they're M sets
and so we can add M sets in the usual way of
just dumping them together in a big box so for
example if J happens to be the set 13 4 it's a
set of natural numbers then the corresponding
EJ would be the sum E11 plus e33 plus e44
if we actually wanted to write it out in
terms of an actual M set it would be the
M set consisting of E11 which is that pixel e33
which is that pixel and e44 which is this pixel
so that's sort of officially what e subj is and
here's a somewhat more compact way of writing
it and here's our way of visualizing it using
the screen where we just indicate the various
pixels involved with ones there and put some zeros
elsewhere so that the position of things is clear
so it's a little bit like an identity Matrix
we're used to Identity Matrix C's having ones
down the diagonal so this is not quite like
that it's a partial identity Matrix there's
ones or zeros down the diagonal and everywhere
else there's zeros so all the pixels that are
actually involved are all of these special
diagonal kind now these identity maxel are item
potent and here are two important laws that I
want you to think about and verify so suppose
that J and J Prime are from set net in other
words they're sets of n natural numbers then
first of all ej^ 2 equals EJ that was the item
potent properties that we' seen for Singleton
one maxel this is now also valid for these more
general maxel which are made up of these Singleton
diagonal maxel and when we multiply the EJ
with a EJ Prime we get another E jble Prime
type of thing where the new set here is the
intersection of J and J Prime so these are
sets of natural numbers so that they have
intersections the intersection might be
empty but that's all right and then in that
case this is the law that tells us how to
multiply two such things and the reason for uh
for things I think can be clearly understood by
an example so here J is 134 and J Prime is 24 then
EJ * EJ well here is EJ written out officially
it's the pixel 11 1 33 44 and we're multiplying
it by itself when we multiply these things well
we multiply each of these pixels by each of those
and most of the time we get emptiness we don't
get emptiness when we multiply 1 one with 1 one in
that case we get a 1 one and also when we multiply
this 33 by 33 we get a 33 and the 44 by 44 equals
44 and all the other products give us nothing so
what we end up getting is EJ back again and this
illustrates the item potent property that's going
to be true in general when we multiply EJ by
EJ Prime well here's EJ and here's EJ Prime
so the maxel consisting of the pixels 22 and
44 so when we look at all possible products
when are we going to get something well so the
only way we're going to get something here is when
we can find a pixel which is common to this m set
and to this m set because two different diagonal
uh pixels always multiply to emptiness 3 3 * 22
is emptiness the only non-empty product here is
the 44 * the 44 which gives us the 44 so we're
getting exactly EJ double Prime where JP Prime is
the intersection of J and J Prime which is just
the set four so I hope this example illustrates
why this is true in general but you could if you
like write out an argument for it in general and
now we can observe that if m is a maxle that ejm
is the Restriction of M to the rows of J while M
EJ is the restriction to The Columns of J this
is just building on the idea of what happened
when we multiply a maxel by a single diagonal
one maxel that we discussed earlier we're just
taking sums of that previous discussion so
for example here's some maxal M and here is
a identity Max or partial identity maxel it's
actually the one corresponding to EJ where J is
134 so there's a one in the first third and fourth
positions here on the diagonal so when we do this
multiplication well what happens is that this one
basically means that this first row is going to be
replicated this one means that the third row
is going to be replicated and this one means
that the fourth row is replicated and the other
rows however many there are are going to be all
killed or sent to zero so it's a restriction of
the maxel to the first third and fourth rows the
rows corresponding to the entries of our identity
Maxim and in the other direction if we have the
identity maximum over on the right hand side we're
multiplying M on the left here M * EJ then what we
get is the same kind of thing but we're picking up
the First Column the third column and the fourth
column please check practice your
max multiplication uh please check
that that's the way things work and that you're
you're comfortable with the difference between
multiplying on the right and on the left so
let's build on that understanding and see
when e subj acts as an identity on some other
maxle so we see that ejm equals m precisely
when m is supported on the rows of J because
we've seen that what this does is it just
chops M into the rows of J restricts M and
so this is going to be equal to M precisely
when m is already to begin with sitting inside
the rows of J and similarly M EJ the other way
around equals m precisely when m is supported on
The Columns of J because we've seen that M * EJ is
restriction of M to The Columns of J we can put
these two together now to inquire when EJ acts
as an identity on a maxel both on the left and on
the right in other words M EJ equals ejm equals m
that will happen precisely when the support of
M is in J cross J what is J cross J it's this
set J cross J is the set of pixels of
the form J1 J2 where J1 and J2 belong to
J so let me illustrate um that in this example
here so if J is 134 as we've been talking about
before then J cross J is a set of pixels it
consists of all pixels of the form J1 J2 where
J J1 and J2 are 1 3 or four so they're actually
all shaded here there's nine of them okay so the
rows are amongst 1 3 and four and the columns
are amongst 1 3 and 4 and what we're saying is
that EJ acts as an identity on a maxel m precisely
when the support of M is in this Frame any maxle
whose nonzero entries belong to this particular
configuration we'll have the property that when
we multiply by EJ either on the right or on the
left that we stay where we are that EJ acts as
the identity and why is that well because it's
just a combination of these two facts the fact
that m is supported on the rows of J means that
EJ is going to act as an identity on the left
and the fact that m is also supported on The
Columns of J means that EJ is also going to
act as an identity on the right so we put these
two conditions together and we get that EJ acts
on any such maxle as an identity both on the
multiplying on the right and on the left so
when we restrict our world when we restrict
our view to not look at all maxel but just
those maxel whose rows and column belong to
this particular set J then we get a smaller
maxel algebra in which EJ this particular maxle
with one one one along the diagonal there is
exactly like an identity it really is an identity
object in that small or constrained Universe okay
so we're picking up sort of Matrix algebra here
in the special case where we are restricting
ourselves to particular sort of square situation
in particular if J was say 1 2 3 then we would
just be looking at the top 3x3 block there and
we would get the usual 3x3 Matrix algebra but I'm
conscious of the importance of not just
restricting ourselves to the top Corner we
do want to think more generally allowing ourselves
arbitrary sets of natural numbers here as indices
that uh sort of Define these frames all right so
here are three propositions that sort of summarize
a little bit what I've been saying here um that
bring into Focus these maxal algebras Associated
to subsets of natural numbers by restricting
ourselves to certain rows and certain columns
and I'm going to leave study of these propositions
to you okay so it's a exercise to verify these
things at least with examples and see if you can
prove them the proofs are not hard and we may
talk a little bit about them um in our next video
okay so the first is that fix j a set of natural
numbers then consider this operation that takes
a maxel m and sends it to the product EJ * m *
EJ then this operation restricts a maxle m to J
cross J in particular m equals EJ M EJ precisely
when the support of M is inside J cross J so
J is maybe 134 if we take an arbitrary maxle
multiplied by EJ on the left and EJ on the
right then what that does is it cuts out all
the stuff in that original big maxle except
those pixels which are lying inside J cross
J so it's restriction to this kind of square
determined by J and on that square this is the
identity the second proposition is that if two
maxel are supported in J cross J so here Max J
cross J is a type that means type of a maxel
whose support is in J cross J so not just all
maxel but maxel which are determined by their
rows and columns all coming from J where J is
something fixed set from natural numbers
that we're defining at the beginning all
right so the claim is that if M and N are
two maxel whose support is in J cross J
then the product is also a maxle who support
is in J cross J so this is really a closed
Little World Max J cross J will be a closed
algebra closed subalgebra of the algebra Vol
maxel and the third is that this EJ element
which in fact does sit inside Max J cross J
it acts as both a left and right identity
in this subalgebra of maxel supported in
J cross J so if we take any maxel in here then
EJ acts both as a left and a right identity on
it all right so please give some thought to this
work it out with some examples that 134 example is
is good and sufficient so just make sure that
you convince yourself of the meaning first of
all of these statements and the fact that they
really relatively straightforward consequences
of the geometry of the maxim multiplication
that we are now hopefully getting familiar with
so in our next video we're going to use
this as a basic framework to build up
some more interesting structures
in the fascinating world of maxel
algebra hope you'll join me for that I'm
Norman Wildberger thanks for listening
[Music]